I think everything
I just played is MIDI data.
And so I wrote and recorded the chorus
in my own voice,
probably a couple of keys lower
than where we landed for Billie
because I have a lower voice,
and just had it as this hook.
I had no idea what to do with it.
I sang through Auto-Tune so it
sounded very atypical of the other music
that I put out.
But I felt the chorus was super,
super catchy and I sat on it.
I didn't have verse ideas or anything.
So I had this,
"I'm not your friend" thing.
And then when Billie came over at some
point later to work on something else,
I pulled up this session
and played her this chorus that I had
and she thought
it was infectious and cool.
And the original line that I'd written
was, "You think you need a man,
I think therefore I am."
And Billie was like,
"Oh, it should be,
'You think that you're a man,
I think therefore I am,'"
which is way cooler
and actually the internal rhyme
structure of that is 'you're' and 'for',
which is way better anyway.
And so we threw her on the hook and then
we set about writing the verses together.
When we first started this
I was in a different studio location
at a house that I lived in
in Highland Park for a while
and Billie was singing into
a Neumann TLM 103,
which she was holding
in her hand.
And so this verse vocal...
So all of that stuff
is recorded on a TLM 103.
And she really liked the laugh
that she did on that take.
And so it was a naturally quiet laugh,
so we gained the laugh by 27 dB
just so that it would pop out
in the mix.
That was back in probably December,
we wrote those couple of lines.
This song... oftentimes
when we're making a song
it's a very short
start-to-finish process.
We write everything in a day or two,
we record it over the next week or two.
This song was like, each time we went
to write, we were recording while we went,
but it was several days over the course
of seven or eight months
to get each individual part.
So literally that day,
all that we got was...
That was it.
And then the next time
we went to revisit it we wrote this...
To me, the heart of Billie's sonics when
I'm working on it in a song like this,
not in every song,
but she's such an incredible harmonizer.
So there's so much chordal information
in a song that otherwise,
really is a baseline and high notes
played in a syncopated pattern.
Most of the chord data
is actually just in her voice.
And then I think the same day we did that,
we ended up writing this part
which was really fun.
And that was... We had the instrumental
layout of that, to be honest.
We knew that we wanted the verse
to end with this stop moment,
where the synths would drop out.
So we had that set up to write over.
And that was, as far as we got that day,
just reintroduce the chorus.
We added a little dropout because the
chorus is... each chorus is a double, right?
It's the entire...
It's really a repeat.
It's like, what can we reintroduce
the second time?
So, the only thing that comes in
on the second chorus, on the second half
is this clap which was a thing
that Billie was doing in the room.
And I thought that gave it
a really fun, lilting thing,
which was really appealing to me.
So I threw it in the recording.
There's also this,
I'm calling it, like, cowbell-type.
It's not a cowbell sample.
It's actually... it's not that complicated
but it's... just that little clackety thing
that rhythmically is doing
what a cowbell would do
in accordance to
the kick drum maybe.
Which I thought gave it
a little bit more neck.
And then we added this bass sweep
instead of the one in the drums
on that part of the chorus,
which goes...
instead of playing
the one on everything.
And it's pretty understated.
There's not a lot made of it,
which I thought was fun.
Because we wrote the song
over the course of so many different days,
each time we have to
reinspire ourselves.
So we got to the second verse
and we thought,
"Well, we really don't need to do
all of the rhythms of the first verse,
we don't need to do the melodies
of the first verse vocally."
And so in trying to reinspire us,
I reintroduced different components.
So I added this
Synth Bass, a Trilian patch.
And just that alone, which is very sparse
for Billie and for me to write with her
completely turned the rhythmic components
of the song on their head
and allowed us to go to a completely
different place rhythmically,
vocally, which is this...
I don't know what to call it
other than a totally
different groove, vocally.
We never would've come
to that place, vocally,
if we hadn't had
that rhythm change.
And I think that's a lesson I'm learning
more and more in producing songs is
what you're capable
of writing over what.
When I first started I was exclusively
a songwriter and then a producer,
where I would sit at a piano
and write a song.
And then I would migrate to a DAW
and record the vocals and record the piano
and maybe add some drums or some bass.
As time goes on, there are totally songs
that we write that way.
Billie has a song called "My Future"
that we wrote that way,
where we sat at an instrument
and played the chords
and then ended up ingesting it
into the system.
In a case like this,
there are things about the songwriting
that would never have been true
if we had tried to write it
on an acoustic guitar first.
So it was super advantageous to
start with the rhythmic components of it.